Feat/adding foundry starter kit section (#117)
rsksmart/devportal: docs/02-developers/04-quickstart/foundry.md

---
sidebar_label: Using Foundry
sidebar_position: 500
title: Rootstock Foundry Starter kit
description: 'Whether you are a seasoned developer or just starting your journey into smart contract development, the foundry starter kit provides a solid foundation for building decentralized applications (dApps) on the Rootstock network.'
tags: [rsk, rootstock, tutorials, developers, foundry, quick starts, dApps, smart contracts]
---

Whether you’re a seasoned developer or just starting your journey into smart contract development, the foundry starter kit provides a solid foundation for building decentralized applications (dApps) on the Rootstock network.

> Rootstock is fully EVM (Ethereum Virtual Machine) compatible. It brings the power of smart contracts to Bitcoin, allowing developers to leverage Bitcoin’s security while benefiting from Ethereum’s ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rootstock is fully EVM (Ethereum Virtual Machine) compatible. It brings the power of smart contracts to Bitcoin, allowing developers to leverage Bitcoin’s security while benefiting from Ethereum’s ecosystem.

In this tutorial, you'll learn how to set up your Foundry development environment, connect to a Rootstock network, write and test smart contracts, deploy them to the Rootstock blockchain, and interact with them. We'll guide you through every step, from installation to minting your first token.
```

## Prerequisites

Before starting the dApp, make sure to have the following prerequisites:

1. **Familiarity with Smart Contracts:**
   - If you’re new to smart contracts, consider learning the basics. Understanding how smart contracts work will enhance your experience with Rootstock development.

2. **Foundry installation using [Foundryup](https://book.getfoundry.sh/getting-started/installation#using-foundryup):**

> - This installing information is taken from the official [Foundry documentation](https://book.getfoundry.sh/getting-started/installation#using-foundryup), in case you need to go in detail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To install, visit the official [Foundry documentation](https://book.getfoundry.sh/getting-started/installation#using-foundryup), for more information.
```

> - Foundryup is the official installer for the Foundry toolchain. You can learn more about it [here](https://github.com/foundry-rs/foundry/blob/master/foundryup/README.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Foundryup is the official installer for the Foundry toolchain. You can learn more about it in the [Foundryup README](https://github.com/foundry-rs/foundry/blob/master/foundryup/README.md).
```

- If you encounter any issues during installation, refer to the Foundryup [FAQ](https://book.getfoundry.sh/faq.html) for assistance.
- Precompiled binaries can be downloaded from the Foundry [GitHub releases page](https://github.com/foundry-rs/foundry/releases). For easier management, we recommend using Foundryup.

To install Foundry in your system, run the following command:
```bash
curl -L https://foundry.paradigm.xyz | bash
```

> This will install Foundryup. Simply follow the on-screen instructions, and the ```foundryup``` command will become available in your CLI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will install Foundryup. Follow the on-screen instructions, and the `foundryup` command will be available via the CLI.
```

> Running ```foundryup``` will automatically install the latest (nightly) versions of the ```precompiled binaries```: ```forge```, ```cast```, ```anvil```, and ```chisel```. For additional options, such as installing a specific version or commit, run ```foundryup --help```.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running `foundryup` automatically installs the latest (nightly) versions of the precompiled binaries: `forge`, `cast`, `anvil`, and `chisel`. For additional options, such as installing a specific version or commit, run `foundryup --help`.
```

> **_NOTE: If you’re using Windows, you’ll need to install and use [Git BASH](https://gitforwindows.org/) or [WSL](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install) as your terminal, since Foundryup currently doesn’t support Powershell or Command Prompt (Cmd)._** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::info[Using Windows]
If you’re using Windows, you’ll need to install and use [Git BASH](https://gitforwindows.org/) or [WSL](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install) as your terminal, since Foundryup currently doesn’t support Powershell or Command Prompt (Cmd).
:::
```

3. **Basic Knowledge of Foundry:**
- Familiarity with Foundry's core concepts and functionalities is recommended. If you're new to Foundry, refer to the [Rootstock Foundry Guide](/developers/smart-contracts/foundry/).

:::tip[Rootstock Blockchain Developer Course]

Learn how to write, test, secure, deploy and verify smart contracts on the Rootstock blockchain network. Enroll for the [Rootstock Blockchain Developer Course](/resources/courses/).
:::

## Setting Up the Sample dApp

### Clone the Repository

Open your terminal or command prompt and run the following command to clone the repository from GitHub:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/rsksmart/rootstock-foundry-starterkit.git
```

### Install Dependencies

Navigate to the cloned repository folder:

```bash
cd rootstock-foundry-starterkit
```

Install all required dependencies using forge:

```bash
forge install OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contracts
```

> ### Obtain Rootstock Testnet and Mainnet RPC URLs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Add Rootstock Testnet and Mainnet RPC URLs
```

This section will walk you through adding Rootstock Testnet and Mainnet RPC URLs to your development environment. These URLs are essential for connecting your application to the Rootstock network and interacting with smart contracts.

There are two ways to obtain RPC URLs:

#### Using Public RPC URLs

> - Visit the [MetaMask Integration on the Rootstock Dev Portal](/dev-tools/wallets/metamask/). This guide provides instructions on setting up MetaMask for Rootstock. While following these steps, pay close attention to the sections on adding custom networks. You'll find the RPC URLs for Rootstock Testnet and Mainnet listed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Visit the [MetaMask Integration on the Rootstock DevPortal](/dev-tools/wallets/metamask/). This guide provides instructions on setting up MetaMask for Rootstock. While following these steps, pay close attention to the sections on adding custom networks. You'll find the RPC URLs for Rootstock Testnet and Mainnet listed.
```

Reviewer: State which one will be used in this tutorial, I see you used the public nodes

#### Using RPC API

> - Create an account at the [Rootstock RPC API](https://rpc.rootstock.io/). Once logged in, navigate to your dashboard and copy the API Key. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create an account on the [Rootstock RPC API](https://rpc.rootstock.io/). Once logged in, navigate to your dashboard and copy the API Key. 
```

### Adding environment variables to your project

> After obtaining the RPC URLs, create a file named `.env` in your project's root directory (important: this file should not be committed to version control). Add the necessary environment variables to the `.env` file:

Reviewer: `.env.example` has only the private key example, how about the API Key?

Reviewer: Can you point me to where this is indicated in the guide?

```
PRIVATE_KEY: Your private key (e.g., from your Metamask account details).
```

> **_NOTE: Make sure the private key you paste, starts with 0x, if does not contain it, please put 0x before your private key. (0x123...)_** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion 
:::tip[Tip]
Ensure the private key copied starts with `0x123...`
:::

```

> ## Running tests to an ERC20 Token Contract

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Running tests on an ERC20 Token Contract
```

> This section runs tests on an ERC20 token contract (fungible token), this is done according to the script located at ```test/Erc20Token.t.sol```. It does test deployment, minting, and transfer of tokens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section runs tests on an ERC20 token contract (fungible token), this is done according to the script located at `test/Erc20Token.t.sol`. It does test deployment, minting, and transfer of tokens.
```

For this, run the next forge command:

```bash
forge test
```

It should return an output similar to the following:

```bash
Compiler run successful!

Ran 2 tests for test/Erc20Token.t.sol:ERC20TokenTest
[PASS] testInitialSupply() (gas: 9849)
[PASS] testTransfer() (gas: 43809)
Suite result: ok. 2 passed; 0 failed; 0 skipped; finished in 8.73ms (1.51ms CPU time)

Ran 1 test suite in 143.90ms (8.73ms CPU time): 2 tests passed, 0 failed, 0 skipped (2 total tests)
```
**_NOTE: If you need additional tests, or want to go deep on this step, visit the [Foundry Tests Documentation](https://book.getfoundry.sh/forge/tests)._** 

## Deploying an ERC20 Token Contract

> This section deploys an ERC20 token contract (fungible token) on the Rootstock network. This contract is located at ```src/Erc20Token.sol``` file, it uses the script located at ```script/Deploy.s.sol``` for this operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section deploys an ERC20 token contract (fungible token) on the Rootstock network. This contract is located at `src/Erc20Token.sol` file, it uses the script located at `script/Deploy.s.sol` for this operation.
```

> Run the following command, replacing `https://public-node.testnet.rsk.co` with either `rskTestnet` or `rskMainnet` rpc url if you have, depending on your desired deployment environment:

Reviewer: Add a tip for how to call this if using the RPC API

```bash
forge script script/Deploy.s.sol --rpc-url https://public-node.testnet.rsk.co --broadcast --legacy
```
:::info[Info]

- [EIP-1559](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1559.md) is not supported or not activated on the Rootstock RPC url
- The `--legacy` flag is passed to use legacy transactions instead of `EIP-1559`.

> - You can remove the `--broadcast` flag if you wan to simulate the transaction without broadcasting it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can remove the `--broadcast` flag if you want to simulate the transaction without broadcasting it.
```

:::

> > If you get an error like `Transaction dropped from the mempool: <tx-id>` or the ```transaction not completed```, check the tx-id in the explorer. The tx may have went successful but the error is still in the logs. Here are the [mainnet](https://explorer.rootstock.io/) and [testnet](https://explorer.testnet.rootstock.io/) explorers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If you encounter an error such as `Transaction dropped from the mempool: <tx-id>` or `transaction not completed`, check the `tx-id` in the explorer. The transaction may have been successful but the error is still within the logs. See the [mainnet](https://explorer.rootstock.io/) and [testnet](https://explorer.testnet.rootstock.io/) explorers for more info.
```

> > Also you can see the transaction registry locally, by checking the folder ```broadcast/Deploy.s.sol/``` and opening the file called ```run-latest.json```, if you check the fields, there is one called ```contractAddress``` which contains the new address deployed for our ERC20 smart contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Also you can see the transaction registry locally, by checking the folder `broadcast/Deploy.s.sol/` and opening the file called `run-latest.json`. See the field called `contractAddress` which contains the new address deployed for the ERC20 smart contract.
```

The result should look like this:
```bash
Sending transactions [0 - 0].
⠁ [00:00:00] [###############################################################################################################################################] 1/1 txes (0.0s)##
Waiting for receipts.
⠉ [00:00:25] [###########################################################################################################################################] 1/1 receipts (0.0s)
##### 31
✅  [Success]Hash: 0x48ea2b06b39cd436a2d7564e20ea5bb598ddc2769e6b18c855170f0e9e4d5687
Contract Address: 0x499e802a6825d30482582d9b9dd669ba82ba8ba4
Block: 5071408
Gas Used: 106719

==========================

ONCHAIN EXECUTION COMPLETE & SUCCESSFUL.
Total Paid: 0. ETH (106719 gas * avg 0 gwei)
```

## Interacting with the Contract - Minting a Token

> If the contract is already deployed, then you can interact with it using ```cast``` this command allows you to interact with the contract, in this case, read the balance of an account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the contract is already deployed, then you can interact with it using `cast` this command allows you to interact with the contract, in this case, read the balance of an account.
```

### Reading the Balance of an Account
In your terminal, run the following command, replacing the placeholders with actual values:

```bash
cast call <contract_address> "balanceOf(address)(uint256)" <wallet_address> --rpc-url <rpc_url>
```
The result should look like this:
```bash
1000000000000000000000 [1e21]
```

## Final Comments

> Explore and be curious about the folders and files of this starter kit. You'll learn how to import `.env` variables for deploying smart contracts, test smart contracts with solidity. Feel free to customize this starter kit to suit your project’s needs. Happy coding!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can explore the folders and files within the starter kit and customize the kit to suit your project’s needs. You can also learn how to import `.env` variables for deploying smart contracts, test smart contracts with solidity, etc.
```

:::info[Using Windows]
If you’re using Windows, you’ll need to install and use [Git BASH](https://gitforwindows.org/) or [WSL](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install) as your terminal, since Foundryup currently doesn’t support Powershell or Command Prompt (Cmd).
:::

3. **Basic Knowledge of Foundry:**
- Familiarity with Foundry's core concepts and functionalities is recommended. If you're new to Foundry, refer to the [Rootstock Foundry Guide](/developers/smart-contracts/foundry/).

:::tip[Rootstock Blockchain Developer Course]

Learn how to write, test, secure, deploy and verify smart contracts on the Rootstock blockchain network. Enroll for the [Rootstock Blockchain Developer Course](/resources/courses/).
:::

## Setting Up the Sample dApp

### Clone the Repository

Open your terminal or command prompt and run the following command to clone the repository from GitHub:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/rsksmart/rootstock-foundry-starterkit.git
```

### Install Dependencies

Navigate to the cloned repository folder:

```bash
cd rootstock-foundry-starterkit
```

Install all required dependencies using forge:

```bash

> forge install OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contracts

Reviewer: @SebasGuaquetaRSK I think you forgot to remove this openseppelin part

```
:::tip[Tip]
Ensure the private key copied starts with `0x123...`
:::

## Running tests on an ERC20 Token Contract
This section runs tests on an ERC20 token contract (fungible token), this is done according to the script located at `test/Erc20Token.t.sol`. It does test deployment, minting, and transfer of tokens.

For this, run the next forge command:

```bash
forge test
```

It should return an output similar to the following:

```bash
Compiler run successful!

Ran 2 tests for test/Erc20Token.t.sol:ERC20TokenTest
[PASS] testInitialSupply() (gas: 9849)
[PASS] testTransfer() (gas: 43809)
Suite result: ok. 2 passed; 0 failed; 0 skipped; finished in 8.73ms (1.51ms CPU time)

Ran 1 test suite in 143.90ms (8.73ms CPU time): 2 tests passed, 0 failed, 0 skipped (2 total tests)
```
**_NOTE: If you need additional tests, or want to go deep on this step, visit the [Foundry Tests Documentation](https://book.getfoundry.sh/forge/tests)._** 

## Deploying an ERC20 Token Contract
This section deploys an ERC20 token contract (fungible token) on the Rootstock network. This contract is located at `src/Erc20Token.sol` file, it uses the script located at `script/Deploy.s.sol` for this operation.

> Run the following command, replacing `https://public-node.testnet.rsk.co` with either `rskTestnet` or `rskMainnet` rpc url if you have, depending on your desired deployment environment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the following command, replacing `https://public-node.testnet.rsk.co` with either `rskTestnet` or `rskMainnet` rpc url if you have the testnet and mainnet environments configured for your desired deployment environment, for this guide, we will use the public node url:
```
